=head1 NAME

CONTRIBUTING - how to help with Type::Tiny

=head1 DESCRIPTION

=head2 Reporting bugs

Bug reports (including wishlist items) can be submitted to RT.

L<https://rt.cpan.org/Dist/Display.html?Queue=Type-Tiny>.

Test cases written using L<Test::More> are always appreciated.

=head2 Fixing bugs

If something doesn't work as documented, or causes unexpected crashes,
and you know how to fix it, then either attach a patch to the bug report
(see above) or as a pull request to the project on GitHub.

L<https://github.com/tobyink/p5-type-tiny>.

Please try to follow the coding style used in the rest of the project.
(Tab indents, spaces for alignment, British English spellings, pod at
the end of code but the start of test cases, etc.)

=head2 Adding Test Cases

New test cases for the Type::Tiny test suite are always welcome.
The coveralls page for Type::Tiny should reveal what parts of the
code are most needing good test cases. Any files with below 95%
coverage are highest priority.

L<https://coveralls.io/github/tobyink/p5-type-tiny>.

=head2 Improving Documentation

While the documentation for each package in Type::Tiny is fairly
complete, Type::Tiny::Manual needs a bit of work.

=head2 Writing Type Libraries

Though I'm unlikely to bundle many more type libraries in this distribution,
uploading your own type libraries to CPAN will strengthen the Type::Tiny
ecosystem.

=head1 AUTHOR

Toby Inkster E<lt>tobyink@cpan.orgE<gt>.

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENCE

This software is copyright (c) 2018 by Toby Inkster.

This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the same terms as the Perl 5 programming language system itself.

=cut
