=pod

=encoding utf-8

=head1 NAME

Type::Tiny::Manual::Contributing - contributing to Type::Tiny development.

=head1 MANUAL

=head2 Reporting bugs

Bug reports (including wishlist items) can be submitted to GitHub.

L<https://github.com/tobyink/p5-type-tiny/issues>.

Test cases written using L<Test::More> are always appreciated.

=head2 Fixing bugs

If something doesn't work as documented, or causes unexpected crashes,
and you know how to fix it, then either attach a patch to the bug report
(see above) or as a pull request to the project on GitHub.

L<https://github.com/tobyink/p5-type-tiny>.

Please try to follow the coding style used in the rest of the project.
(Tab indents, spaces for alignment, British English spellings, pod at
the end of code but the start of test cases, etc.) 

L<https://github.com/tobyink/misc-development-tools/blob/master/bin/my-perltidy>

=head2 Adding Test Cases

New test cases for the Type::Tiny test suite are always welcome.
The coveralls page for Type::Tiny should reveal what parts of the
code are most needing good test cases. Any files with below 95%
coverage are highest priority.

L<https://coveralls.io/github/tobyink/p5-type-tiny>.

Type::Tiny is now also on Codecov which does coverage accounting
slightly differently, giving some stricter targets to aim for.

L<https://codecov.io/gh/tobyink/p5-type-tiny>

=head2 Type::Tiny::XS

I'm not really a C programmer, nor am I that familiar with Perl's internals,
so help with L<Type::Tiny::XS> is always appreciated. There are some type
constraints in L<Types::Standard>, L<Types::Common::String>, and
L<Types::Common::Numeric> which don't have XS implementations.

=head2 Writing Type Libraries

Though I'm unlikely to bundle many more type libraries in this distribution,
uploading your own type libraries to CPAN will strengthen the Type::Tiny
ecosystem.

=head2 Donate

If you or your organization uses Type::Tiny and you wish to contribute
financially, you should be able to find links to donate on the Type::Tiny
website at L<https://typetiny.toby.ink/>.

Please note that I am not suggesting that you must do this in order for me
to continue working on Type::Tiny and related modules.

=head1 NEXT STEPS

You've reached the end of the manual!

But each class, type library, and other package includes more detailed
documentation.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<https://toby.ink/open-source/contributing/>.

=head1 AUTHOR

Toby Inkster E<lt>tobyink@cpan.orgE<gt>.

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENCE

This software is copyright (c) 2013-2014, 2017-2023 by Toby Inkster.

This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the same terms as the Perl 5 programming language system itself.

=head1 DISCLAIMER OF WARRANTIES

THIS PACKAGE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED
WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTIBILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

=cut
