=pod

=encoding utf-8

=for highlighter language=ChangeLog

=head1 NAME

Type::Tiny::Manual::Installation - how to install Type::Tiny

=head1 MANUAL

Installing Type-Tiny should be straightforward.

=head2 Installation with cpanminus

If you have cpanm, you only need one line:

  % cpanm Type::Tiny

If you are installing into a system-wide directory, you may need to pass
the "-S" flag to cpanm, which uses sudo to install the module:

  % cpanm -S Type::Tiny

=head2 Installation with the CPAN Shell

Alternatively, if your CPAN shell is set up, you should just be able to
do:

  % cpan Type::Tiny

=head2 Manual Installation

As a last resort, you can manually install it. Download the tarball and
unpack it.

Consult the file META.json for a list of pre-requisites. Install these
first.

To build Type-Tiny:

  % perl Makefile.PL
  % make && make test

Then install it:

  % make install

If you are installing into a system-wide directory, you may need to run:

  % sudo make install

=head2 Dependencies

Type::Tiny requires at least Perl 5.8.1, though certain Unicode-related
features (e.g. non-ASCII type constraint names) may work better in newer
versions of Perl.

Type::Tiny requires L<Exporter::Tiny>, a module that was previously
bundled in this distribution, but has since been spun off as a separate
distribution. Don't worry - it's quick and easy to install.

At run-time, Type::Tiny also requires the following Perl modules:
L<B>, L<B::Deparse>, L<Carp>, L<Data::Dumper>, L<Scalar::Util>,
L<Text::Balanced>, L<overload>, L<strict>, and L<warnings>.
All of these come bundled with Perl itself.

Certain features require additional modules. Stack traces on exceptions
require L<Devel::StackTrace>. The L<Reply::Plugin::TypeTiny> plugin for
L<Reply> requires L<Reply> (obviously).

L<Type::Tiny::XS> is not required, but if available provides a speed
boost for some type checks. (Setting the environment variable
C<PERL_TYPE_TINY_XS> to false, or setting C<PERL_ONLY> to true will
suppress the use of Type::Tiny::XS, even if it is available.)

The test suite additionally requires L<Test::More>, L<Test::Fatal>
and L<Test::Requires>. Test::More comes bundled with Perl, but if
you are using a version of Perl older than 5.14, you will need to
upgrade to at least Test::More version 0.96. Test::Requires and
Test::Fatal (plus Try::Tiny which Test::Fatal depends on) are bundled
with Type::Tiny in the C<inc> directory, so you do not need to
install them separately.

If using Type::Tiny in conjunction with L<Moo>, then at least Moo
1.006000 is recommended. If using Type::Tiny with L<Moose>, then at
least Moose 2.0000 is recommended. If using Type::Tiny with L<Mouse>,
then at least Mouse 1.00 is recommended. Type::Tiny is mostly
untested against older versions of these packages.

=head3 Type::Tiny and cperl

L<cperl|http://perl11.org/cperl/> is an extended version of Perl with
various incompatible changes from the official Perl 5 releases.

As of Type::Tiny 1.010001, cperl is a supported platform for Type::Tiny with
some caveats. At the time of writing, Moose will not install on the latest
cperl releases, so using Type::Tiny with Moose on cperl is untested. Moo can
be forced to install, and Type::Tiny is verified to work with Moo on cperl.
cperl not only enables a new warnings category called "shadow" (which is good;
they're potentially useful) but switches on shadow warnings by default (which
is annoying). Type::Tiny does not (and likely will never) attempt to work
around these warnings. If the warnings bother you, you should be able to catch
them using C<< $SIG{__WARN__} >>. Certain features of L<Eval::TypeTiny> are
broken under cperl, but they're not thought to have any practical effect on
Type::Tiny or its other bundled modules.

=head1 NEXT STEPS

Here's your next step:

=over

=item * L<Type::Tiny::Manual::UsingWithMoo>

Basic use of Type::Tiny with Moo, including attribute type constraints,
parameterized type constraints, coercions, and method parameter checking.

=back

=head1 AUTHOR

Toby Inkster E<lt>tobyink@cpan.orgE<gt>.

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENCE

This software is copyright (c) 2013-2014, 2017-2023 by Toby Inkster.

This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the same terms as the Perl 5 programming language system itself.

=head1 DISCLAIMER OF WARRANTIES

THIS PACKAGE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED
WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTIBILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

=cut

