=pod

=encoding utf-8

=head1 NAME

Type::Tiny::Manual::UsingWithTestMore - Type::Tiny for test suites

=head1 MANUAL

=head2 Test::TypeTiny

This is a module for testing that types you've defined accept and reject
the values you think they should.

 should_pass($value, $type);
 should_fail($othervalue, $type);

Easy. (But yeah, I always forget whether the type goes first or second!)

There's also a function to test that subtype/supertype relationships are
working okay.

 ok_subtype($type, @subtypes);

Of course you can just check a type like this:

 ok( $type->check($value) );

But the advantage of C<should_pass> is that if the C<EXTENDED_TESTING>
environment variable is set to true, C<should_pass> will also perform a
strict check on the value, which involves climbing up the type's
inheritance tree (its parent, its parent's parent, etc) to make sure
the value passes all their constraints.

If a normal check and strict check differ, this is usually a problem
in the inlining code somewhere.

See L<Test::TypeTiny> for more information.

=head2 Type::Tiny as a Replacement for Test::Deep

Here's one of the examples from the Test::Deep documentation:

 my $name_re = re('^(Mr|Mrs|Miss) \w+ \w+$');
 cmp_deeply(
   $person,
   {
     Name       => $name_re,
     Phone      => re('^0d{6}$'),
     ChildNames => array_each($name_re)
   },
   "person ok"
 );

It's pretty easy to rewrite this to use Types::Standard:

 my $name = StrMatch[ qr/^(Mr|Mrs|Miss) \w+ \w+$/ ];
 should_pass(
   $person,
   Dict[
     Name         => $name,
     Phone        => StrMatch[ qr/^0d{6}$/ ],
     ChildNames   => ArrayRef[$name]
   ]
 );

There's nothing especially wrong with L<Test::Deep>, but if you're already
familiar with Type::Tiny's built-in types and you've maybe written your
own type libraries too, it will save you having to switch between using two
separate systems of checks.

=head1 NEXT STEPS

Here's your next step:

=over

=item * L<Type::Tiny::Manual::Params>

Advanced information on Type::Params, and using Type::Tiny with other
signature modules like Function::Parameters and Kavorka.

=back

=head1 AUTHOR

Toby Inkster E<lt>tobyink@cpan.orgE<gt>.

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENCE

This software is copyright (c) 2013-2014, 2017-2021 by Toby Inkster.

This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the same terms as the Perl 5 programming language system itself.

=head1 DISCLAIMER OF WARRANTIES

THIS PACKAGE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED
WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTIBILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

=cut

